[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The perfect drug from the
point of view of a drug company
is one, first of all,
that doesn't kill people
because you-- people need to
take the drug for a long period
of time in order for
it to be profitable.
Secondly, it needs
to be patentable,
which means that the drug
company has exclusive right
to sell it, and it can market
it at a much higher price, which
means that there are large
numbers of drugs which may well
be perfectly useful,
but no one is
going to do research on them
because they're out of patent.
And thirdly, it must
be reasonably safe.
But in fact, what
we've seen is the drug
companies are not too
concerned about the side
effects of drugs.
Because the feeling is that,
by the time that the side
effects become obvious, the drug
has usually run out of patent,
and so it's not too
much of a problem.
And you can see the--
this happening in
drugs like the SSRIs,
the antidepressant
drugs, where it's now
emerging that there are
problems with suicide
and with addiction.
And there have been
court cases on where
people have sued the dru--
the manufacturers over them.
But in the meantime,
the drug company--
that the drug has racked up
enormous amounts of money.
And the problems
with side effects
are really just kind of
operating costs, the kind
of things that you factor in and
you don't worry about too much.
Because the main aim is to get
the drug out there and it be--
gets to be used by as
many people as possible.
Anyone who's
interested in producing
a nonpatentable
medical treatment,
and we're talking
about something
like fish oils, or vitamins,
or minerals, or any other--
breathing techniques,
any other kind
of way of dealing
with people's illness,
the major problem with it
is that it's not patentable.
You can't say, I have
invented this new treatment,
and no one else can use it, and
I can charge large sums for it.
In the case of perhaps
diabetes, well,
there's a lot of evidence to
show that if you put people
on a low glycemic diet and you
give them certain supplements
that you can bring
down their blood sugar,
and they will be
enormously improved.
One of the other big problems
with the drug approach
is the issue of side effects,
adverse drug reactions.
Just for a start, in the UK,
the generally accepted figure
of the number of people
who die each year
as a result of adverse drug
reactions is about 10,000.
To put that in some
sort of perspective,
the number of people who
die from motor car accidents
is about 3,500.
We're all very worried
about motor car accidents.
We don't seem to be so worried
about adverse drug reactions.
The number of people who die
as a result of prostate cancer,
which is of enormous
concern, and we
have campaigns, and so
on, is round about 9,000
in this country.
So the number of
people killed by drug--
adverse drug reactions is
really quite significantly high.
And then when you
factor into that
there's going to be probably
four or five times that many
affected but they're
not actually killed,
but they're just made rather ill
and have to go into hospital,
and so on, and then
you add into that that
as a general rule,
which has been accepted
by all sorts of studies, the
proportion of adverse drug
reactions which are
actually reported
runs at somewhere
between 1% and 10%.
So if we've got figures of
10,000 people being killed,
it's almost certain that it's
considerably more than that.
So that is your
baseline is that we
have a large number of people
being damaged by drugs.
The doctors will tell
you that the drugs
have been trialed and tested.
But what you have to realize
when you take a new drug
is that you're
essentially embarking
on an uncontrolled experiment.
The drugs will only
have been tested
for the purposes of getting
their license on maybe a few--
on a few hundred, at most
a few thousand people.
And they are then going to be
given to literally to millions.
And within those
millions of people,
there is going to be an
enormous range of the way
that their systems work, the way
that they react to the drugs.
And so people are going
to have side effects.
And nobody knows who's going
to be damaged by those side
effects or what
they-- what they're
going to be until the drug has
been out there in the market
for several years.
And then you have a
system of reporting
which only picks up 5% or
10% of these side effects.
And you have a problem
with a large number
of people having difficulties
with the drugs which
are not even recognized.
An essential part of
any drug is that it's--
because it's targeting
a single pathway
in a complicated system, it's
going to mess up other pathways
to a greater or lesser degree.
And that's just inevitable.
The great advantage of
the nondrug approach
is that it uses body
systems which are--
were designed-- we are
designed to work in that way.
For example, if you take
something like hypertension,
there is a complicated
system to do with breathing.
If you breathe in a certain
way, in a certain rhythm, which
is a rhythm actually which is
rather similar to what you get
with chanting, in
long traditions
of religious chanting,
it gets people
to breathe in a
particular way, which
brings into sync both
your heart rhythms
and the rhythms that are
controlling your blood
pressure.
And you can bring down
blood pressure simply
by this form of breathing.
But who is going to
run large-scale trials
on religious
breathing techniques
in order to bring down your
hypertension levels when you
can make billions of pounds
by selling them hypertension
medication, which almost
certainly will have effect
on other pathways in the body.
One of the big myths
which is peddled
in relation to
drug-based medicine
is that it's firmly scientific.
It certainly has a lot of
the trappings of science.
There are large-scale
trials that
are written up in journals.
And we have a lot of evidence
that they perform more
effectively than a placebo.
But the idea that
all drugs are firmly
based in the evidence and
all of the nondrug treatments
are just a mixture of hope, and
delusion, and placebo effect,
and charlatans just doesn't
really stand up to examination.
For example, in order for
a drug to be licensed,
it has to show that it is more
effective than a placebo in two
trials.
This doesn't mean to say
that the drug company can't
do lots of other trials
in which it doesn't
prove to be more effective.
It just doesn't need
to publish those.
What it needs to do is to go
along to the regulator and say,
we have these two trials
which show that the drug is
more effective than a placebo.
Can we have a license
to market it, please?
And assuming that
all goes well, they
get their license to market.
So you then have
an official license
to use that drug for a
particular treatment.
It may be to lower
blood pressure.
It may be to low
cholesterol, so on.
And then that is what we
call evidence-based medicine.
There is evidence that
this treatment works
to do a particular
thing, and that's
why we know that
drug-based medicine is
based on the evidence.
Well, there was a
trial, a study that
came out about 18
months ago which
looked at the extent to
which doctors in America
prescribe drugs for what they
had received their license for.
And they found that 20% of
the prescriptions written
by doctors were not
for the condition
that the drug had been
given the license for.
And this is called
"off-label prescribing."
And it's a very
useful thing to do.
It's a perfectly legitimate
part of medical practice
is you have a patient.
They haven't responded
to various other drugs.
You say, well, we'll
try this oth-- this one.
It may be a new drug.
It hasn't had a license
for this condition.
Or it may be an
older drug, but it
doesn't have it specifically,
but it might work.
There's good
scientific reasons why
we think it's targeting
the same pathways.
It might work--
perfectly legitimate.
But the analysis that the
authors of this research
then went on to point out that
in 70% of this, these cases
where the drugs were
licensed without--
the drugs were
prescribed without having
a proper license,
in 70% of the cases,
there was no scientific
evidence that this
would do any good whatsoever.
And I came across a particularly
striking example of this,
what's called
"off-label prescribing,"
here in the UK where I was
looking at what was happening
to people with dementia.
Alzheimer's the
best known example,
but there are other
forms of dementia.
And it's obviously in
all Western countries
a big problem.
We have something
like 700,000 people
in this country who have been
diagnosed with having dementia.
And I found that something
like 200,000 of them,
so about over a third of them,
were receiving drugs which
are antipsychotic medication.
These are very
heavy tranquilizers
which are officially
licensed to treat people
with schizophrenia, I
think, bipolar disorder,
but that they have a range of
very unpleasant side effects.
They cause muscular tension
and a shuffling gait,
and they also do terrible
things to your metabolism,
and they cause people to put
on weight at a fantastic rate.
And they can lead to
early signs of diabetes.
These drugs have
never been licensed
for use in dementia patients.
There are no trials, large
scale or small scale,
showing that dementia
patients benefit
from being given these drugs.
In fact, there have
been several warnings
issued by the regulatory bodies
saying that they should not
be used on dementia patients
because they increase
their risk of having
strokes or heart attacks.
Not only that, but
the one justification
for using it which is
sometimes used by commissions
is they say, well, they are
useful to control behavior
in the case of people who, these
patients, they get agitated.
They get upset.
And they don't know
where they are,
and these drugs
are useful to help
with their behavioral problems.
There have been now been two
large-scale, double-blind,
placebo, proper
scientific trials showing
that this is not the case.
These drugs are not
beneficial for treat--
for treating behavior.
So we have drugs which
are known to be dangerous,
which are not licensed,
which have studies
showing that they don't work.
And yet they are being
prescribed to 200,000
elderly people in this country.
And this is what's called
"scientific medicine."
[MUSIC PLAYING]